===75 DLR (AD) 171===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Criminal Review Petition Nos. 66, 67 and 69 of 2022

Decided On: 02.03.2023

Zahangir Alam (Md.) and Ors. Vs. State

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., Md. Nuruzzaman, Obaidul Hassan, Borhanuddin, M. Enayetur Rahim, Md. Ashfaqul Islam, Md. Abu Zafor Siddique and Jahangir Hossain, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: S.N. Goswami, Senior Advocate and N.K. Saha, Senior Advocate instructed by Zainul Abedin, Advocate-on-Record
For Respondents/Defendant: A.M. Aminuddin, Attorney General, Sk. Md. Morshed, Additional Attorney General, Mohammad Saiful Alam, Sayem Mohammad Murad, Tamanna Ferdous, AAGs and Abantee Nurul, AAG instructed by Sufia Khatun, Advocate-on-Record

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Order XLVII Rule 1; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 164; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 164(3); Constitution Of The People's Republic Of Bangladesh - Article 105; Penal Code, 1860 - Section 201, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 300, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 302, Penal Code, 1860 - Section 34

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Order dated 05.04.2022 passed by this Division in Criminal Appeal No. 90 of 2013 with Criminal Appeal No. 108 of 2013 with Criminal Petition Nos. 257, 260 of 2022 and 322-323 of 2019 and Jail Petition Nos. 27-28 of 2014

Result:
In Favour of State

JUDGMENT
Md. Ashfaqul Islam, J.

1. All the review petitions are directed against a judgment of this court in its appellate forum maintaining the death sentence awarded to the petitioners Md. Zahangir Alam, Dr. Mian Mohammad Mohiuddin and commutation of sentence from death to imprisonment for life awarded to Md. Abdus Salam.

2. The prosecution case, in short, was that, Dr. S. Taher Ahmed was the senior most Professor of the Department of Geology and Mining, University of Rajshahi. He was a Member of both the Departmental Planning Committee and the Expert Committee of the University. Pursuant to the pre-concerted plan, Dr. Taher was brutally killed at his Quarters (Pa-23/B) by all the accused in furtherance of their common intention 1-2-2006 after 10-00 pm or thereabout on his arrival thereat from Dhaka. After the killing of Dr. Taher, his dead body was dumped into a manhole behind the place of occurrence house. In the morning of 3-2-2006, his dead body was recovered from the manhole. Thereafter, the son of the victim, namely, Mr. Sanjid Alvi Ahmed alias Himel (PW 1), lodged an ejahar with Motihar Police Station, Rajshahi.

3. The Investigating Officers PW 47 Md. Omar Faruk, PW 48 Md. Golam Mahfiz and PW 49 Achanul Kabir investigated the case. Accused Zahangir Alam, Abdus Salam and Nazmul made confessional statements before PW 46 Magistrate Jobeda Khatun recorded under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Finding prima facie case, the last Investigating Officer submitted a charge-sheet against all the accused including the acquitted accused Md. Azim Uddin Munshi and Md. Mahbub Alam @ Saleheen for committing offence punishable under section 302/201/34 of the Penal Code.

4. The Tribunal charged all the accused except Azim Uddin Munshi under section 302/34 of the Penal Code and the co-accused Azim Uddin Munshi was charged under section 201 of the Penal Code. They pleaded not guilty thereto and claimed to be tried.

5. The defence version of the case, as it appears from the trend of cross-examination of the prosecution witnesses, was that the accused are innocent and have been falsely implicated in the case and the alleged confessional statements of the accused Zahangir, Salam and Nazmul are the products of police torture, oppression and maltreatment and the PW 25 Dr. Md. Sultan-ul-Islam Tipu and PW 29 Golam Sabbir Sattar Tapu are responsible for the death of Dr. Taher.

6. After hearing both the parties and upon perusing the materials on record and having regard to the attending facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the prosecution brought the charge home against the appellants and petitioners, and accordingly, it convicted and sentenced them. The Tribunal also found the co-accused Saleheen and Azim Uddin Munshi not guilty and accordingly acquitted them.

7. Against the said judgment and order of the Tribunal, the convicts preferred criminal appeals and jail appeals. The Tribunal transmitted the record to the High Court Division for confirmation of the sentence of death which was registered as Death Reference No. 57 of 2008. The High Court Division by the impugned judgment and order, dismissed the Criminal Appeal Nos. 3455 and 4058 and Jail Appeal Nos. 631-634 of 2008. However, the High Court Division commuted the sentence of death to imprisonment for life awarded to convict Md. Abdus Salam and Md. Nazmul. It confirmed the sentence of death awarded to the appellant Dr. Mian Md. Mohiuddin and Md. Zahangir Alam. Against which, they preferred criminal appeals, criminal petitions and jail petitions and the state preferred Criminal Petitions. By a judgment and order dated 5-4-2022 this Division dismissed all those cases and affirmed the death sentence awarded to the petitioners Md. Zahangir Alam, Dr. Mian Mohammad Mohiuddin and commutation of sentence from death to imprisonment for life awarded to Md. Abdus Salam. Against which the present review petitions have been filed by the convicts.

8. In the judgment the charges and evidence of the witnesses both oral and documentary have been meticulously considered and after evaluation of the same this court affirmed the sentence of death awarded to the two petitioners and commutation of sentence from death to imprisonment for life awarded to the another petitioner as mentioned above. In a review matter this court cannot re-assess the evidence afresh and re-hear the case. This court disposes of the points so far as it is relevant for the disposal of the matter. Learned Counsel argued on various points as if he were arguing an appeal and accordingly we refrained from discussing those points on reassessment of the evidence.

9. Mr. SN Goswami, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioners in Review petition Nos. 66 and 69 of 2022 has submitted a written argument. His contention is that this court committed error of law in believing the confessional statements made by the accused petitioners without considering the following points:

Confessional statement of accused Jahangir was not voluntary in nature.
Confession recorded by Magistrate in violation of section 164(3), Code of the Criminal Procedure cannot be used to convict the Appellant
Confessional statement of accused Jahangir was not true.
Retracted confession should be corroborated in material particular by other evidence.
10. The points raised by the learned counsel as above have already been answered by this Division in the appeal. This court has thoroughly assessed the evidence of the witnesses both oral and documentary and on a careful evaluation of the confessional statements, found that their statements are consistent with one another and corroborates the version given by each other and opined that confessing accused were speaking the truth. Therefore, those points are beyond the ambit of review and there is no scope for reconsideration of those facts.

11. The learned Senior Advocate further submits that the accused petitioner is in the condemn cell for more than 14 1/2 years suffering the pangs of death and it may be a good ground for commutation of sentence of death.

12. Mr. SM Shahjahan, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner in Review petition No. 67 of 2022 has adopted the same argument advanced by the learned Senior Advocate Mr. SN Goswami.

13. On the other hand Mr. AM Aminuddin, the learned Attorney-General appearing for the State, submits that this Division elaborately discussed the evidence and answered those points raised by the learned Senior Counsel in the judgment sought to be reviewed. Since the points have already been considered by this Division in the judgment and the learned Counsel failed to show any error of law apparent on the face of the record in the conclusion arrived at by this Division, the points raised by the learned Counsel do not call for any interference.

14. Let us first discuss the relevant law, rules and decisions of the apex courts of home and abroad to maintain a petition for review in a criminal proceeding.

15. Provision of Article 105 of the Constitution empowers this Division to review its judgment pronounced or Order made "subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament or of any Rules made by the division". This Division has made Rules for the review of criminal proceeding.

16. Rule 1 of Order XXVI in part IV of the Supreme Court of Bangladesh (Appellate Division) Rules, 1988 provides:-
"Subject to the law and the practice of the Court, the Court may, either of its own motion or on the application of a party to a proceeding, review its judgment or order in a Civil proceeding on grounds similar to those mentioned in Order XLVII, rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure and in a Criminal Proceeding on the ground of an error apparent on the face of the record."

17. In the case of Zobaida Naher @ Jharna vs. Khairunnessa being dead her heirs Md. Feroz Alam and others 3 BLC (AD) 170 it has been observed:
"A review cannot be granted to urge fresh grounds when the judgment itself does not reveal an error apparent on the face of the record. To allow such a prayer for review is to allow re-hearing of the appeal on points not urged by a parry".

18. For better understanding let us now discuss what is an error apparent on the face of the record. This has been explained in the case of AHM Mustain Billah vs. Bangladesh 57 DLR (AD) 41. The concept of error apparent on the face of the record has been explained by his lordship Md. Fazlul Karim, J. at paragraphs 27-28:
"Mere error of fact or law is no error on the face of the record. It is such obvious error of law, which has either crept through Court's oversight or Counsel's mistake and failure to explain the legal position by the learned Counsel for the party. The error must be such which at a glance can be detected without advancing elaborate argument.
Though there is no hard and fast rule as to what is an error apparent on the face of the record but the same depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. But there could not be an error apparent on the face of the record merely because two possible views as to the interpretation or application of law vis-a-vis the particular facts of a case, one view accepted by the Court though may be erroneous but could not be the ground of review even if a decision or order is erroneous in law or on merits, the same shall not amount to an error apparent on the face of the record."

19. In the case of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto vs. Suite reported in PLD 1979 SC 741 as to scope of review and what is error apparent it has been observed:
"In Order that an error may be a ground for review, it is necessary that it must be one which is apparent on the face of the record, that is, it must be so manifest, so clear that no Court could permit such an error to remain on the record. It may be an error of fact or of Law, but it must be an error which is self-evident and floating on the surface, and does not require any elaborate discussion or process of ratiocination. The contention mat the exposition of the Law is incorrect or erroneous, or mat the Court has gone wrong in the application of the Law to the facts of the particular case: or that erroneous inferences have been drawn as a result of appraisal or appreciation of evidence, does not constitute a valid ground for review. However, an Order based on an erroneous assumption of material fact, or without adverting to a provision of Law, or a departure from an undisputed construction of the Law and the Constitution may amount to an error apparent on the face of the record. At the same time if the judgment under review or a finding contained therein, although suffering from an erroneous assumption of facts, is sustainable on other grounds available on the record then although the error may be apparent on the face of the record, it would not justify a review of the judgment or the finding in question. In other words, the error must not only be apparent, but must also have a material bearing on the fate of the case. Errors of inconsequential import do not call for review."

20. In a good number of cases of this Division including the case of Mazdar Hossain vs. Ministry of Finance 7 BLC (AD) 92 it has been held:
"A review is no means an appeal in disguise whereby an erroneous decision is reheard and corrected. A review lies where an error apparent on the face of the record exists. It is not a rehearing of the main appeal. Review is not intended to empower the Court to correct the mistaken view of law, if any, taken in the main judgment. It is only a clerical mistake or mistake apparent on the face of the record that can be corrected by leave but does not include the correction of any erroneous view of law taken by the Court."

21. In the case of Sow Chandra Kanta and another vs. Sheik Habib reported in MANU/SC/0064/1975 : AIR 1975 SC 1500 where Krishna Iyer, J. observed as follows:
"A review of a judgment is a serious step and reluctant resort to it is proper only where a glaring omission or patent mistake or like grave error has crept in earlier by judicial fallibility. A mere repetition through different counsel of old and overruled arguments, a second trip over ineffectually covered ground or minor mistakes of inconsequential import are obviously insufficient. The very strict need for compliance with these footers is the rationale behind the insistence of counsel's certificate which should not be a routine affair or a habitual step."

22. A review cannot be granted to urge fresh grounds when the judgment itself does not reveal an error apparent on the face of the record. To allow such a prayer for review is to allow a rehearing of the appeal on points not urged by a party. We find support for this view from the following observation of Hamoodur Rahman, CJ in Mohd. Hussain vs. Ahmad Khan, 1971 SCMR 296 (297):
"A review cannot be granted on the ground that the Counsel appearing at the original hearing did not argue or press a particular point which was available to him then and could have been found out with a little amount of diligence. This would really amount to granting a re-hearing of a matter merely to make good the failure on the part of Counsel to argue all the points that could have been argued. This cannot furnish an adequate ground for review."

23. The core question for consideration is whether there is error apparent on the face of the record which calls for interference of the impugned judgment. It is an established jurisprudence that a review is by no means an appeal in disguise whereby an erroneous decision is reheard and corrected, but lies only against patent error of law. Where without any elaborate argument one could point to the error and say that here is a substantial point of law which stares one in the face, and mere could reasonably be no two opinions to be entertained about it, a clear case of error apparent on the face of the record would be made out. It is only a clerical mistake or mistake apparent on the face of the record that can be corrected but does not include the correction of any erroneous view of law taken by the Court.

24. Further, it has now been settled that an error is necessary to be a ground for review but it must be one which is so obvious that keeping it on the record will be legally wrong. The moot point is, a party to a litigation is not entitled to seek a review of judgment merely for the purpose of rehearing or a fresh decision of the case. The power can be extended in a case where something obvious has been overlooked-some important aspects of the matter has not been considered, the court can reconsider the matter. There are exceptional cases where the court can remedy its judgment. In the alternative, it may be said that the error must also have a material real ground on the face of the case.

25. This Division has repeatedly held that the court should not be oblivious of the theme that when the finality is attached to the judgment delivered by a court, particularly the judgments at the apex level of the judicial hierarchy, upon a full-fledged hearing of the parties, a review petition being neither in the nature of a rehearing of the whole case nor being an appeal against judgment, review is not permissible only to embark upon a reiteration of the same contention which were advanced at the time of hearing of the appeal, but were considered and repelled in the judgment under review. It was also expressed that while dispensing justice, it is the duty of the court to resolve the issue of law properly brought before it and once it is done, the finality is reached and then a review cannot be made on any grounds whatsoever. It is because of the fact that an opinion pronounced by this Division which stands at the apex of the judicial hierarchy should be given finality and any departure from that opinion will be justified only when circumstances of a substantial and compelling character make it necessary to do so.

26. Thus, the powers of review can be exercised sparingly within the limits of the statute. In the realm of law the courts and even the statues lean strongly in favour of finality of decisions legally and properly made. If the cases are reopened on flimsy grounds which have already been addressed by the courts then mere will be no end to the litigation. That is why, the power of review is restricted by given guidelines of the apex courts of the sub-continent.

27. Another vital aspect in respect of sentence of death for the offence of murder has been spelt out in the case of Rasedul Islam vs. State 68 DLR (AD) 114 which is as under:--
"Predictably the exceptions to section 300 of the Penal Code have no application in this case and the accused persons have also not taken any plea in this regard. When such an act which is eminently dangerous and must in all probability cause death is committed with knowledge mat death might be the probable result without any excuse,' the offence is murder. This clause applies only to a case of dangerous actions without intention to cause specific bodily injury to any person. The knowledge which accompanies the acts must be death. The act was so eminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death. The sentence provided for the offence of murder is death and only in extraneous circumstances, life sentence may be awarded. On consideration of the brutality of the incident, the High Court Division has rightly confirmed the sentence of death to the petitioners. No special reason is required to be assigned in awarding the death sentence if the offence attracts section 302. Since the sentence of death is the legal sentence for murder particularly if the murder is perpetrated cold-bloodedly and in the absence of any extenuating circumstances to commute the sentence, this Division has committed 'no error of law in maintaining' the petitioners' sentence. The accused petitioners were involved in heinous crime which was committed with inhuman brutality and the very nature of the incident called for no other than the extreme penalty provided in law. The enormity of the crimes and the gravity of the situation in which it was committed outweigh the consideration of other factors to consider the commutation of the sentence. As regards delay, it is now settled that mere delay is not a legal ground for commutation of the sentence."

28. But in the instant case, the learned Counsel for the petitioners argued the case, as if treating the case one as a regular appeal without attempting to make out a case one of error in the decision apparent on the face of the record or that the judgment is liable to be reviewed for any substantial reasons or any statutory provision was unnoticed in the impugned judgment.

29. From the nature of the offence it appears to us that the petitioner is in no way entitled to get any sympathy. We do not find any mitigating or extenuating circumstances on record for commutation of the sentence of death. Delay in the disposal of this case cannot by itself be a ground for commuting the sentence of death to one of imprisonment for life since the crime committed by the petitioner was premeditated senseless, dastardly and beyond all human reasonings.

30. On the question of confessional statements, this court has discussed the evidence thoroughly in support of the plea and disbelieved the defence plea. All points agitated by the learned counsels on behalf of the petitioners are not relevant for disposal of the review petition. The points raised by the learned counsels are reiteration of the points agitated at the time of hearing of the appeal.

31. In a recent decision of Md. Shukur Ali vs. the State 74 DLR (AD) 11 of this Division his lordship Mr. Obaidul Hassan, J. observed:
"We hold that confessional statement of a co-accused can be used against others non-confessing accused if there is corroboration of that statement by other direct or circumstantial evidence. In the instant case, the makers of the confessional statements vividly have stated the role played by other co-accused in the rape incident and murder of the deceased which is also supported/corroborated by the inquest report, postmortem report and by the depositions of the witnesses particularly the deposition of P.Ws. 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 14 and 18 regarding the marks of injury on the body of the deceased. Every case should be considered in the facts and circumstances of that particular case. In light of the facts and circumstances of the present case, we are of the view that the confessional statement of a co-accused can be used for the purpose of crime control against other accused persons even if there is a little bit of corroboration of that confessional statement by any sort of evidence either direct or circumstantial. (Emphasis added). Thus, the accused namely Shukur and Sentu are equally liable like Azanur and Mamun for murdering the deceased after committing rape."

32. Further in the instant case his Lordship Mr. Hasan Foez Siddique, CJ maintained:
"There was no provocation and the manner in which the crime was committed was brutal. It is the legal obligation of the Court to award a punishment that is just and fair by administering justice tempered with such mercy not only as the criminal may justly deserve but also the right of the victim of the crime to have the assailant appropriately punished is protected. It also needs to meet the society's reasonable expectation from court for appropriate deterrent punishment conforming to the gravity of offence and consistent with the public abhorrence for the heinous offence committed by the convicts. It is unfortunate but a hard fact that appellants and petitioners have committed such a heinous and inhumane offence. The murder of a genius professor of the University has shocked the collective conscience of the Bangladeshi people. It has a magnitude of unprecedented enormity."

33. Culture of impunity and magnanimity in no way can over shadow the fathomless detestable offence that has been committed in this ill-fated ugly case. Mercy cannot be an option in such type of case.

34. We insist on accountability for gruesome violations of our penal law because that is how we defend the law and demonstrate our insistence on respect for the law going forward in a progressive legal system. If we tail to ensure accountability across the legal system by ending impunity, we risk undermining the very beneficial effects to which the nascent accountability drive that has built over the past decades. That is the final message we would wish to propel in adjudicating this significant criminal review espousing incidents that were horrendous and vile.

35. Fortified with the decisions and discussions as made above we are of the view that there is hardly any scope of rehearing of the matter afresh as a court of appeal in a review petition Further in the instant petition the learned counsel fails to point out any error in the judgment apparent on the face of the record. Therefore, all the review petitions merit no consideration and accordingly those are dismissed.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===


===75 DLR (AD) 1===
Appellate Division (Civil)
Mr. Justice Hasan Foez Siddique, Chief Justice
Mr. Justice Borhanuddin
Mr. Justice M. Enayetur Rahim
Mr. Justice Krishna Debnath

Civil Review Petition No. 08 of 2020.

(Arising out of civil petition for leave to appeal Nos. 971 of 2014)

(From the order dated the 24th day of November, 2016 passed by this Division in Civil Petition No. 971 of 2014)

Durnity Daman Commission VS Md Ashraful Haque and others

Judgement Date: June 30, 2022

Counsels:
Md. Khurshid Alam Khan, Senior Advocate instructed by M. Soyeb Khan, Advocate-on-Record
- For the Petitioner

Md SM Shajahan, Senior Advocate instructed by Shadhun Kumar Banik Advocate-on-Record
— For the Respondent No. 1.

None Represented
--- For the Responden Nos. 2-3.

Judgment
M. Enayetur Rahim, J: This review application under Article 105 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh is directed against the order dated 24-11-2016 passed by this Division in civil petition for leave to appeal No. 971 of 2014 disposing the same with observations.

2. Facts, relevant for disposal of the review petition are as follows:

The present Respondent No. 1 (herein-after referred to as writ petitioner-respondent) filed writ petition No. 7314 of 2011 under article 102 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of Bangladesh before the High Court Division challenging the proceedings contain in Memo No. দুদক/সেকজা/ঢাকা-১/২৬০৫ dated 7-8-2011 issued by the writ respondent No. 3 directing the writ petitioner-respondent to submit records in connection of his wealth statement.

3. In the writ petition it is contended that the writ respondent No: 3 as an inquiry officer issued a notice being Memo No. দুদক/সেকজা/ঢাকা-১/১৭৪৬ dated 19-10-2010 to the writ petitioner-respondent asking for submitting some records of wealth of the writ petitioner-respondent and to make appearance before him on 26-10-2010 at 10-00 am.

4.In response to the said notice/memo dated 19-10-2010 the writ petitioner-respondent submitted the written wealth statement before the writ respondent No. 3 on 7-11-2010 and accordingly the writ respondent No. 3 accepted the said written statement of wealth.

5.Thereafter, the writ respondent No. 2 issued a notice being Memo No. দুদক/সেকজা/ঢাকা-১/৬৫১ dated 24-4-2011 to the writ petitioner-respondent by exercising power under section 26(1) of the Anti-Corruption Commission Act, 2004 asking him to submit his wealth statement.

6.Thereafter, the writ petitioner-respondent prayed time for submitting the statements of wealth on 23-5-2011 and 25-5-2011 respectively and the writ respondent No. 2 allowed 7 (seven) days time for submitting the same by his memo dated 31-5-2011.

7. Thereafter, the writ petitioner-respondent on 31-5-2011 submitted wealth statement before the writ respondent No. 2 along with his family members statements of wealth on prescribed form.

8. Eventually, the writ respondent No. 3 as an inquiry officer issued a notice being Memo No. দুদক/সেকজা/ঢাকা-১/২৬০৫ dated 7-8-2011 to the writ petitioner-respondent asking him to submit some records of wealth and to make appearance before him on 16-8-2011 at 10-00 am.

9. Having received the above notice the writ petitioner-respondent challenged the same before the High Court Division by filing the above writ petition.

10. A Division Bench of the High Court Division initially issued a Rule Nisi and after hearing the Rule by its judgment and order dated 13-6-2013 discharged the Rule relying on the case of Md Shahidullah Mia vs Government of Bangladesh and others in connection with writ petition No. 940 of 2011.

11. Against the said judgment and order the writ petitioner-respondent filed civil petition for leave to appeal No. 971 of 2014 before this Division and this Division after hearing disposed of the same with the observations as under:

"The matter relates to issuance of notice upon the writ petition for submitting wealth statement. We noticed from the record that 3 (three) successive notices have been served upon the writ petitioner, of them, 2 notices were issued by the same officer of the Commission. If the Commission is not satisfied with the wealth statement, there is provision for filling case against the writ petitioner, but the Commission cannot issue repeated notice upon any person for submitting wealth statement. This is a malafide act on the part of Durnity Daman Commission. We direct the Chairman of Durnity Daman Commission to take legal action against the officers who intentionally issue such notices. The judgment of the High Court Division is quashed."
12. Feeling aggrieved by the above findings and observations, the writ respondent-Durnity Daman Commission (hereinafter referred. to as the Commission) has filed this review petition.

13. Mr Md Khurshid Alam Khan, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the present petitioner submits that the issuance of notice for gathering information regarding the wealth statements is necessary for conducting the inquiry/investigation and, as such, issuance of successive notices do not mean harassment; hence, question of malafide act on the part of the Commission does not arise at all.

14. Mr Khan further submits that the impugned notice has been issued in view of section 19/20 of the Anti-Corruption Commission Ain, 2004 (hereinafter referred to as Ain, 2004) read with rule 20 of the Anti-Corruption Commission Rules, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as Rules, 2007) and section 160 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. There is no legal bar to issue successive notices for collecting information regarding the allegations made in the complaint and it is not possible for the Commission to ascertain whether the wealth is disproportionate to know source of the writ petitioner-respondent's income or not. and, as such, question of malafide act of the issuance of successive notices by the Commission does not arise at all and, as such, the impugned order is required to be reviewed.

15. However, Mr SM Shahjahan, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the writ petitioner-respondent having supported the impugned order passed by this Division has submitted that in guise of inquiry or investigation, as the case may be a citizen cannot be harassed by the investigating agency i.e., the Commission.

16. We have heard the learned Advocates for the respective parties, perused the impugned order and notice as well as the relevant provision of law and Rules.

17. In the instant case the petitioner Commission served a notice on 7-8-2011 upon the writ petitioner-respondent, which was as under:

“দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন
সমন্বিত জেলা কার্যালয় ঢাকা-১
(দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন আইন-২০০৪ ও দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন বিধিমালা, ২০০৭!)

স্মারক নং-দুদক/সেজকা/ঢাকা-১/২৬০৫ তারিখ-৭/৮/১১

প্রাপক,
জনাব মোঃ আশরাফুল হক
বাড়ী নং-৯, রোড নং-২৩এ,
সেকশন-১২বি, বনানী, ঢাকা-১২১৩

বিষয়: অনুসন্ধানের স্বার্থে তথ্যাদি সরবরাহ প্রসঙ্গে

সূত্র: দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন, সমন্বিত জেলা কার্যালয়, ঢাকা-১ এর ই/আর নং-৪৬/১১
অনুসন্ধানাধীন ব্যক্তি/ব্যক্তিবর্গের পরিচিতি এবং অভিযোগের সংক্ষিপ্ত বিবরণঃ
জনাব মোঃ আশরাফুল হক এর বিরুদ্ধে জ্ঞাত আয় বহির্ভূত সম্পদ অর্জনের অভিযোগ।

সূত্রে উল্লিখিত অভিযোগের সুষ্ঠু অনুসন্ধানের স্বার্থে নিম্নবর্ণিত রেকর্ডপত্র/কাগজপত্র পর্যালোচনা করা একান্ত প্রয়োজন।

অতএব, আগামী ১৬-৮-২০১১ খ্রিঃ তারিখ ১০-০০ ঘটিকায় ঢাকা-১, এর নিকট নিম্নবর্ণিত রেকর্ডপত্র/কাগজপত্র সরবরাহের জন্য আপনাকে বিশেষভাবে অনুরোধ করা হলো।

উল্লেখ্য যে, সংশ্লিষ্ট রেকর্ডপত্র/কাগজপত্র যথাসময়ে আপনার নিকট/দপ্তরে ফেরত দেওয়া হবে। রেকর্ডপত্র হস্তান্তরের সময় উহার ছায়ালিপি আপনার নিকট/দপ্তরে রাখা যেতে পারে।

সংশ্লিষ্ট রেকর্ডপত্রের বিবরণঃ
গত ৩১-৫-২০১১ খ্রিঃ তারিখে সচিব, দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন, প্রধান কার্যালয়, ঢাকা বরাবর আপনার দাখিলকৃত সম্পদ বিবরণীতে বর্ণিত স্থাবর-অস্থাবর সম্পদের অর্জন ও উৎস সংক্রান্ত রেকর্ডপত্র।

মোঃ আনোয়ারুল হক
অনুসন্ধানকারী কর্মকর্তা ও সহকারী পরিচালক
দুর্নীতি দমন কমিশন
সমন্বিত জেলা কার্যালয়, ঢাকা-১
মোবাঃ ০১৯১৮৯২৩৯০১”
18. Though High Court Division held that the Commission has got the power to issue such a notice but this Division by the impugned order did not endorse the said view, rather disposed of the same holding that if the Commission is not satisfied with the wealth statement there is provision of filing case against the writ petitioner, but the Commission cannot issue repeated notices upon any person for submitting wealth statement. This is a malafide act on the part of the Commission.

19. This Division further directed the Chairman of the Commission to take legal action against the officers who intentionally issued such notices and also quashed the judgment of the High Court Division.

20. To decide the issue involved in the case it is necessary to examine rule-8 & 11 of the Rules, 2007 which run as follows:

“৮। অনুসন্ধান কার্য চলাকালে অভিযুক্ত ব্যক্তির শুনানী গ্রহণ-
(১) দুর্নীতি বিষয়ক কোন অভিযোগের অনুসন্ধান চলাকালে কমিশন বা কমিশন কর্তৃক ক্ষমতা প্রাপ্ত কোন কমিশনার বা কর্মকর্তা যদি মনে করে যে, অভিযোগের সহিত সংশ্লিষ্ট ব্যক্তির বক্তব্য শ্রবণ করা প্রয়োজন তাহা হইলে অভিযুক্ত ব্যক্তিকে লিখিত নোটিশ প্রদান করিয়া নোটিশে উল্লিখিত সময়সীমার মধ্যে মৌখিক বা লিখিত বক্তব্য পেশ করিবার সুযোগ প্রদান করিতে পারিবে।
(২) উপ-বিধি (১) এর অধীন নোটিশ প্রাপ্ত ব্যক্তি তাহার বিরুদ্ধে আনীত অভিযোগ খণ্ডন করিয়া নোটিশে নির্দেশিত সময়সীমার মধ্যে ব্যক্তিগতভাবে বা তাহার নিয়োজিত আইনজীবীসহ মৌখিক বা লিখিত বক্তব্য পেশ করিতে পারিবে এবং উক্তরূপে বক্তব্য পেশ করা হইলে সংশ্লিষ্ট কমিশনার বা কর্মকর্তা উহা সংশ্লিষ্ট নথিতে অন্তর্ভুক্ত করিবেন।”
...
“১১। তদন্ত কার্য চলাকালে অভিযুক্ত ব্যক্তির শুনানী গ্রহণ-
(১) দুর্নীতি বিষয়ক কোন অভিযোগের অনুসন্ধান শেষ হওয়ার পর অভিযোগ প্রাথমিকভাবে প্রতিষ্ঠিত হইলে তদন্ত চলাকালে কমিশন যদি মনে করে যে, অভিযোগের সহিত সংশ্লিষ্ট ব্যক্তির বক্তব্য লিখিত নোটিশ প্রদান করিয়া নোটিশে উল্লিখিত সময়সীমার মধ্যে মৌখিক বা লিখিত বক্তব্য পেশ করিবার সুযোগ প্রদান করিতে পারিবে।
(২) উপ-বিধি (১) এর অধীন নোটিশ প্রাপ্ত ব্যক্তি তাহার বিরুদ্ধে আনীত অভিযোগ খণ্ডন করিয়া নোটিশে নির্দেশিত সময়সীমার মধ্যে ব্যক্তিগতভাবে বা তাহার নিয়োজিত আইনজীবীসহ মৌখিক বা লিখিত বক্তব্য পেশ করিতে পারিবে এবং উক্তরূপে বক্তব্য পেশ করা হইলে সংশ্লিষ্ট কমিশনার বা কর্মকর্তা উহা সংশ্লিষ্ট নথিতে অন্তর্ভুক্ত করিবেন।”
21. From the above rules it is abundantly clear that in course of inquiry or investigation, as the case may be, the Commission has got the power to issue notice upon the person(s) against whom an inquiry or investigation is going on to appear before the Commission for giving him a chance to hear and to place or submit his written or verbal statement and connecting documents with regard to the allegation brought against him.

22. The provision of section 26 of the Ain, 2004 is as follows:

"Declaration of assets.—
(1) Whenever the Commission, on any information and after conducting such [inquiry] as it may deem necessary, is satisfied that any person or any other person on his behalf is in possession or has acquired any property disproportionate to his legal source of income, the Commission may, by order in writing, direct that person to furnish statement of his assets and liabilities including any other information specified in that order in the manner prescribed by the Commission.
(2) If any person—
(a) fails to submit a written statement or an information in compliance with the order mentioned under sub-section (1) after receipt of the same or submits any written statement or any information which for sufficient reasons is considered false or baseless, or
(b) submits any book, accounts, record, declaration, return or any document under sub-section (1) or gives any statement which, for sufficient reasons, is considered false or baseless,
he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 3 (three) years, or with fine, or with both."
23. If, we meticulously examine the above provision, then it will be crystal clear that prior giving notice under section 26 of the Ain, 2004 the commission has got the power to make an inquiry. Further, the Commission, if after receiving the statement furnished by the concerned person(s) pursuant to the notice under section 26 of the Ain, 2004 is not satisfied, then as per rule 6 of the Rules, 2007 the Commission for the purpose of holding inquiry is empowered to appoint an inquiry officer, and in course of inquiry the Commission or concerned officer as authorized to do so is also empowered to issue notice as per provision of rule 8 of the Rules, 2007 upon the concerned person(s) for the purpose of inquiry asking him to submit or place his written or verbal submissions and the relevant documents.

24. Thus, notice under section 26 of the Ain, 2004 and notice for the purpose of inquiry in view of rule 8 of the Rules, 2007 is quite different and distinguishable.

25. Upon perusal of the notice, impugned before the High Court Division, Annexure-F to the writ petition it reveals that in the notice subject matter of the notice (বিষয়) has been described as ‘বিষয়: অনুসন্ধানের স্বার্থে তথ্যাদি সরবরাহ প্রসঙ্গে’ And in the said notice the writ petitioner-respondent was asked to provide the documents in support of his wealth statement submitted pursuant to the notice under section 26 of the Ain, 2004.

26. So, it is clear that the notice has been issued upon the writ petitioner-respondent for the purpose of proper and effective inquiry and the writ petitioner-respondent was asked to submit/provide the documents in support of his wealth statement submitted before the commission in pursuant to the notice under section 26 of the Act, 2004.

27. We have no hesitation to hold that this procedure of inquiry by the Commission is very fair, transparent and accountable and this procedure is for the benefit of the person(s) against whom an inquiry is going on. In course of inquiry the concerned person(s) is getting chance of being heard before the inquiry officer to defend himself. Similarly, after filling of the case during investigation period Rule 11 of the Rules, 2007 provides similar provision for defending an accused in an investigation process.

28. Further, section 19 of the Act, 2004 has empowered the Commission to do anything prescribed for carrying out of purpose of the Ain, 2004.

29. Section 19 of the Ain, 2004 runs as follows:

"19. Special Powers of the Commission in respect of inquiry or investigation.—
(1) The Commission shall have the following powers in respect of inquiry and investigation, namely:—
(a) to issue [notice to witnesses] and ensure attendance thereof and to examine witnesses;
(b) to detect and produce any document;
(c) to take evidence;
(d) to call for public records or copy thereof from any court or office;
(e) to issue [notice] for examination of witnesses and documents; and
(f) to do anything prescribed for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission may require any person to furnish any information regarding a matter of inquiry or investigation and the person so required shall be bound to furnish such information kept under his custody.
(3) if any person causes resistance to any officer legally empowered by the Commission or a Commissioner in exercise of his powers under sub-section (1), or deliberately disobeys any direction given under that sub-section, it shall be a punishable offence and for such offence he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 (three) years, or with fine, or with both."
30. It is our considered view that the word `any person' used in section 19(2) includes the person(s) against whom inquiry or investigation as the case may he is going on.

31. Similar provision, like section 19 of the Ain, 2004 has also been made in rule 20 of the Rules, 2007 empowering the inquiry/investigating officer to take following measures—

ক্রমিক নং	কমিশনের বিশেষ ক্ষমতা	ক্ষমতা প্রাপ্ত কর্মকর্তা
১ (ক)	সাক্ষীর প্রতি নোটিশ জারি ও উপস্থিতি নিশ্চিতকরণ এবং জিজ্ঞাসাবাদ করা	অনুসন্ধান কার্যের দায়িত্ব প্রাপ্ত কর্মকর্তা, বা তদন্ত কার্যের দায়িত্ব প্রাপ্ত কর্মকর্তা, যে ক্ষেত্রে যাহা প্রযোজ্য
২ (খ)	কোন দলিল উদঘাটন এবং উপস্থাপন করা
৩ (গ)	কোন অফিস হইতে পাবলিক রেকর্ড বা উহার অনুলিপি তলব করা
৪ (ঘ)	আইনের উদ্দেশ্য পূরণকল্পে নির্ধারিত অন্য যে কোন বিষয়
32. If we meticulously examine the above two provisions i.e., section 19 of the Act, 2004 and 20 of Rules; 2007, coupled with rule 8 and 11 of the above Rules, then we have no hesitation to hold that those provisions have been made for the interest and benefit of a person(s) against whom an inquiry or investigation is going on as he is giving opportunity to defend himself in inquiry or investigation stage. Thus, there is no room to say that issuance of such notice by the Commission or its authorized officer is harassing, malafide and prejudiced to the concerned person(s).

33. Earlier, in disposing the leave petition this Division did not take into consideration the above provisions of law and Rules and thus, came to a erroneous decision, which is apparent on the face of the record.

34. Thus, impugned order is reviewed. Findings and observations made in the order are hereby expunged. The order of quashment of the proceedings and directing the Commission to take legal action against the officers who issued the notices are set-aside.

Accordingly, the review petition is disposed of.

End.

"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."

===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 278===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH 
(APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Appeal Nos. 53-54 of 2013

Decided On: 01.02.2023

The Chairman, Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and Ors.
... Vs. ...
Parvin and Ors.

Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Hasan Foez Siddique, C.J., M. Enayetur Rahim and Jahangir Hossain, JJ.

Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Sheikh Reajul Hoque, Advocate instructed by Madhumalati Chowdhwy Barua, Advocate-on-Record

For Respondents/Defendant: Murad Reza, Senior Advocate instructed by Syed Mahbubar Rahman, Advocate-on-Record

Acts/Rules/Orders:
Specific Relief Act, 1877 - Section 42, Specific Relief Act, 1877 - Section 55, Specific Relief Act, 1877 - Section 56

Prior History:
From the Judgment and Decree dated the 01.12.2011 passed by the High Court Division in First Appeal Nos. 184 and 183 of 2008

Result:
Appeal Dismissed

JUDGMENT
Jahangir Hossain, J.

1. Both the appeals have arisen out of the common judgment and decree of the High Court Division. This Division has also heard both the appeals analogously and disposed of the same by a single judgment.

2. These two civil appeals, by leave, are directed against the judgment and decree dated the 1st day of December, 2011 passed by the High Court Division in First Appeal Nos. 183 and 184 of 2008 allowing the appeals.

3. The relevant facts for disposal of these civil appeals, in short, are that plaintiff-respondent, Dr. Md Abdul Malek filed Title Suit No. 39 of 2004 and plaintiff-respondent, Begum Parvin filed Title Suit No. 40 of 2004 both in the Court of Joint District Judge, 3rd Court, Dhaka, alleging, inter alia, that they had joined Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial Research [BCSIR] on 27-12-1980 as Research Officer and on 13-11-1981 as Research Zoologist and the authority with satisfaction got them promoted as Senior Scientific Officers on 24-8-1990 and on 30-3-1988. They had been serving there for 23[twenty three] years and 22[twenty two] years respectively without violating any rules and regulations of BCSIR. Both the plaintiff-respondents applied to visit Canada from 1-2-2002 to 30-4-2002 at their own costs and they were accordingly granted permission by the authority to visit Canada. After going there, they became sick because of adverse cold weather prevailing in Canada. While sick, they had applied from Canada for extension of leave for further one year and the defendant-appellants had received their applications in due time. They sent the applications through registered mail. The pro-forma defendant Nos. 4 and 5 made assurance to the plaintiff-respondents for granting extension of leave by a fax message on 28-9-2003. Thereafter, on 19-11-2003, they came back to Dhaka in order to perform the ritual following the death of the mother of plaintiff-respondent, Dr. Md Abdul Malek and then went to the office of BCSIR and came to know that they were dismissed from their respective service on 23-9-2003 by a letter under reference Further case of the plaintiff-respondents is that no show cause notice was issued upon them by the defendant-appellants and in spite of knowing the fact that the respondents were staying in Canada, the defendant-appellants deliberately abstained from sending any letter or show cause notice to their address in Canada and had fabricated many documents with the intention to dismiss them from their respective service. They got no opportunity to defend their case and, as such, the order of dismissal is absolutely against the principle of natural justice and they have been dismissed under that law which is not applicable to their case. Hence, they filed the suits with prayer that the letter described in the schedule to the plaint to be declared illegal and also to declare that the respondents are still in the service of the appellants from 30-4-2002 and to pay them necessary costs and to grant any other reliefs as they are entitled to as per law and equity.

4. The defendant-appellants by filing written statement denying all the material allegations, contending, inter alia, that the suits are not maintainable in the present form. There were no causes of action for filing the suits. The suits are barred by limitation as well as by the principles of waiver and acquiescence. The main contention of the appellants is that in the letter dated 12-1-2002 by which the respondents were granted leave, there was a condition that under no circumstances the leave should be extended. The appellants further contend that they sent letters to the respondents in Canada and asked them to join their respective service and they had also issued notices and second show cause notice in the newspapers as per applicable rules, but in spite of expiry of the period of leave, the respondents were illegally staying in Canada and, as such, the order of dismissal was lawful and the respondents cannot get any relief in the suits.

5. During the trial in Title Suit No. 39 of 2004, the plaintiff-respondent examined him-self as PW 1 and produced some documents in support of his case which were marked as exhibit Nos. 1 to 9. The appellants examined one Md Shamsul Haque, Administrative Officer of BCSIR, as DW 1 to support their case and produced certain documents which were marked as exhibit Nos. Ka to Jha. While in Title Suit No. 40 of 2004, the plaintiff-respondent examined herself as PW 1 and produced some relevant papers in support of her case, which were marked as Exhibit Nos. 1 to 20. The appellants examined the aforesaid Administrative Officer, BCSIR, as DW 1 to support their case and produced certain documents which were marked as exhibit Nos. Ka to Jha.

6. The trial Court, after having heard the parties and assessed the evidence on record, dismissed the suits by its judgments and decrees dated 24-4-2008. Feeling aggrieved by the judgments and decrees of the trial Court, the present-respondents as appellants preferred First Appeal Nos. 183 of 2008 and 184 of 2008 before the High Court Division. The learned Judges of the High Court Division having heard the appeals analogously allowed them.

7. Being aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the judgment and decree of the High Court Division, the defendant-appellants preferred the aforesaid civil appeals arisen out of Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal Nos. 1187-88 of 2012 before this Division.

8. Mr. Sheikh Reajul Hoque, learned Advocate, appearing for the appellants, submits that plaintiff-respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have filed the suits for declaration that the order of dismissal from service is illegal and they are still in service but have not prayed for any direction for their reinstatement and thereby the suits are not maintainable. He further adds that the learned Judges of the High Court Division failed to appreciate that the plaintiff-respondents joined the BCSIR before enforcement of and the authority of BCSIR rightly dismissed plaintiff-respondent Nos. 1 and 2 after following all legal formalities as provided in the law.

9. On the contrary, Mr. Murad Reza, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, contends that without issuing any show cause notice, the appellants, BCSIR, most illegally dismissed them from service in violation of the principle of natural justice by depriving them from getting any opportunity to defend themselves against the allegations brought in. He further contends that the authority of BCSIR was fully aware of the address of the plaintiff-respondents in Canada, but they hopelessly failed to bring any evidence before the Court below to show that they issued the notices asking the plaintiff-respondents to join their respective services. He also contends that the impugned letter dated 29-3-2003 [Exhibit 8] was issued under section 3(b) of the Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979 and the plaintiff-respondents were dismissed under 4(A) of the said Ordinance. The plaintiff-respondents were not Government Servants, rather employees of BCSIR, their dismissal from respective services under the provisions of Government Servants (Special Provision) Ordinance, 1979 is void ab-initio. He finally contends that while the plaintiff-respondents fell ill in Canada, they sent applications on 18-2-2002 to the defendant-appellants praying for extension of leave from 1-4-2002 to 30-4-2003 and the defendant-appellants, the then Chairman of BCSIR having received the same vide a fax message dated 28-9-2003 assured the plaintiff-respondents that their prayers for leave would be granted but the same was not subsequently considered by the authority and, as such, the instant appeals are liable to be dismissed.

10. Heard the contentions of the learned Advocates for both the parties and perused the materials along with other connected papers on record.

11. It reveals from the relevant documents on record that the plaintiff-respondents are husband and wife. Both of them were appointed in BCSIR on different dates. They went to Canada taking 3 [three] months' ex-Bangladesh leave from 1-2-2002 to 30-4-2002 to visit their relatives. In the approval letters of leave of the plaintiff-respondents, there were some conditions to the effect that under no circumstances, the leave should be extended. Admittedly, both the plaintiff-respondents after going there fell ill because of adverse cold weather in Canada and during their illness, they applied to defendant-appellants No. 2 to extend their leave from 1-5-2002 to 30-4-2003, i.e. for l[one] year. Thereafter, they applied for 2[two] years' medical leave from 1-5-2003 to 30-4-2005. In total, they prayed for 3[three] years' leave. Defendant-appellants No. 2 assured them to grant the prayers for leave. The trial Court opined that the plaintiff-respondents should have returned home making their leave short because of adverse cold weather in Canada. Here, the trial Court failed to realize the reason of their not coming back to Bangladesh and to resume their work in the office. They submitted medical report which was not satisfactory to the trial Court. It appears that the plaintiff-respondents participated in a project extended for 3 [three] months and consumed 3[three] months' leave in Canada involved themselves in different personal activities. They reiterated that they had been ill. It is also revealed from the findings of the trial Court that the defendant-appellants sent letters dated 29-7-2002 asking them to return home and join the service within 15[fifteen] days, otherwise, their service will be terminated as per Government Servants [Special Provisions] Ordinance, 1979. They sent two show cause notices first on 28-11-2002 and second on 8-1-2003. The show cause notices were also published in the daily newspapers. But the plaintiff-respondents as alleged did not respond to the notices. Thereafter, in the 154th Board Meeting of the Council held on 28-7-2003, the Board took decision to dismiss the plaintiff-respondents from their respective services. Therefore, the Council dismissed them from respective services on 23-9-2003. In overall observation of the trial Court, it is revealed that the plaintiff-respondents showed negligence in joining their respective services and disobedience to the letters of the defendant-appellants. Moreover, they did not show cogent grounds for extending their leave. They only prayed that they were ill for adverse cold weather. The trial Court further observed that as there was no cold weather in Bangladesh, they would have returned in Bangladesh shortening their leave and then they would come round. It is also observed that they first took ex-Bangladesh leave for visiting their relatives only.

12. It reveals that Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research Ordinance, 1978 has been established under section 3(1) of the Ordinance as a statutory public body. According to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 3, the Council shall be a body corporate. The Council is an entity distinct from the Government. It has been enshrined in section-3 of the Ordinance, 1978 that:

"3.(1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Ordinance, the Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, establish a Council to be called the Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, (2) The Council shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and shall be said name sue [sic] and be sued."
13. In section 18 of the Ordinance, 1978, the Council has been authorized to appoint its own officers and employees. It has been envisaged in section-18 that:

"The Council may, subject to such regulations as may be made in this behalf and the availability of budgetary provisions, create such posts and appoint, on such terms and conditions as it may determine such officers, consultants, advisers, auditors and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under this Ordinance:

Provided that no post carrying a monthly initial pay of Taka sixteen hundred or above shall be created without the approval of the Government."
14. The provisions of section 28 of the Ordinance, 1978 delegates to the Council powers, with previous approval of the Government to make regulations in order to provide for all matters for which provisions are necessary or expedient to give effect to the provisions of the Ordinance. BCSIR has accordingly framed a service Regulations, in 1989 for its employees which was published in Bangladesh Gazette dated Monday, January 9, 1989. It has been enunciated in section 28 that:

"(1) The Council may, with the previous approval of the Government, make regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance and the rules, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Ordinance.

(2) All regulations made under this section shall be published in the official Gazette and shall come into force on such publication."
15. In Chapter two, regulation No. 3 deals with the procedure of appointments; in Chapter four, regulation No. 16 deals with the procedure of various kinds of leave, regulation No. 29 deals with the procedure of returning from leave; in Chapter seven, regulation No. 37 deals with ordinary conduct and discipline, regulation No. 39 deals with the procedure of various sorts of penalties, regulation No. 42 deals with the procedure of inquiry of severe penalty, regulation No. 45 deals with the procedure of re-instatement, regulation No. 47 deals with the procedure of appeal against any order.

16. Having examined the impugned letters both dated 29-3-2003 marked as Exhibit 8, by which the plaintiff-respondents were dismissed, that these letters were issued under section 3(b) of Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979 and they were dismissed under section 4(A) of the said Ordinance. It is apparent that the plaintiff-respondents were dismissed from their respective service by following the procedure and in exercise of the powers with reference to the Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979. It appears that BCSIR is a statutory public body and is an entity different from government. As per provisions of section 18 of the above mentioned Ordinance, the Council shall appoint its own officers and employees. It is clear that these two plaintiff-respondents were employees of BCSIR and they were not government servants. Being distinct entity, BCSIR has adopted a regulation on 8-1-1989 with previous approval of the government and in exercise of the power delegated under section 28 of the above Ordinance, being Chapter-7, containing regulation Nos. 37 to 48, makes provisions regarding conduct and discipline of the employees of BCSIR. It is observed that at the time when the notices were published in the newspapers, the regulations, prescribing specific provisions regarding disciplinary action, were very much in force and were also applicable in respect of the plaintiff-respondents. Although the plaintiff-respondents were not government servants, rather admittedly, they were servants/employees of BCSIR. It is found that the disciplinary proceedings initiated with reference to the Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979 along with issuance of the charge-sheets under section 3 of the said Ordinance and issuance of the letters of dismissal rendered with reference to section 4 of the said Ordinance are void ab-initio. But without resorting to the provisions of these regulations, the BCSIR authority has resorted to the procedure laid down in Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979.

17. On perusal of the record, it is revealed that the relief prayed in the suit does not come within the scope of section 42 of the Specific Relief Act, 1877. The plaintiff-respondents did not ask for any direction in the form of mandatory injunction seeking re-instatement. Admittedly, plaintiff-respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have not prayed for their re-instatement in service with arrear rather the relief sought for being in declaratory form and the trial Court found that such relief is not available to the plaintiff-respondents even though they have a good case for directing reinstatement. In the contentions of the learned Advocate for the defendant-appellants, it appears that the result of the instant suit is a decree without any consequential relief, i.e. without reinstatement in the service and arrear though the consequential relief is a mandatory provision of law and since the principle of mandatory injunction settled by this Division in the case of Rupali Bank Ltd. vs Md Arab Ali and others, reported in 7 BLC (AD) 1 and Jahir Uddin (Md) vs Rupali Bank Ltd. and others reported in 12 BLC (AD) 114, and Bangladesh Tobacco Company Limited and another vs Md Azizul Huq and another, reported in 8 MLR (AD) 149 : 7 BLC (AD) 119. In the case of Osman Gani Mondal vs Mainuddin Ahmed and others, reported in 27 DLR (AD) 61 wherein this Division held that it is a cardinal rule of construction that where statutory restrictions are couched in negative terms, they are almost invariably held to be mandatory and in another decision of the case of Aminul Islam and others vs M/s. James Finlay and Company Limited, Khulna, reported in 26 DLR (SC) 33, this Court held that it is needless to say that difficulties are sometimes felt to determine whether a certain provision of statute is directory or mandatory, when the legislature itself expresses its opinion as to. the consequence of non-compliance with a certain direction, no difficulty arises and from the book namely 'Interpretation of Statutes and Documents' written by Mr. Mahmudul Islam [Page-238; Mandatory and directory provision] wherein it is stated, "where a statute requires something to be done or to be done in a particular manner and the consequences of failure to do so are also provided, no difficulty arises and the provision is construed as mandatory" and from above decision, it has been settled that the proviso of section 42 of Specific Relief Act is a mandatory provision by following the provision of section 55 of the Specific Relief Act.

18. It has been enshrined in section 42 of the Specific Relief Act that:

"Any person entitled to any legal character, or to any right as to any property, may institute a suit against any person denying, or interested to deny, his title to such character or right, and the Court may in its discretion make therein a declaration that he is so entitled, and the plaintiff need not in such suit ask for any further relief:

Bar to such declaration-Provided that no Court shall make any such declaration where the plaintiff, being able to seek further relief than a mere declaration of tide, omits to do so.
19. It has been enumerated in section 55 of the Specific Relief Act that:

"When, to prevent the breach of an obligation, it is necessary to compel the performance of certain acts which the Court is capable of enforcing, the Court may, in its discretion, grant an injunction to prevent the breach complained of, and also to compel performance of the requisite acts."
20. It is earlier discussed that BCSIR is a statutory body and it has its own individuality and separate entity which is to run following its own rules and regulations. It is found that the plaintiff-respondents had been dismissed from their services after taking decision of the Board of BCSIR upon recording the reasons thereon, but the proceeding drawn upon them and the notices published in the newspaper with the provisions of Government Servants (Special Provisions), Ordinance, 1979 is not concurrent with the rules and regulations of BCSIR.

21. The learned Advocate for the defendant-appellants in support of his contentions placed some references including the case of Osman Gani Mondal vs Mainuddin Ahmed and others, reported in 27 DLR (AD) 61, where it was held that:

"Thus the above contentions revolve round the question whether the second proviso to paragraph 7 of the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution is mandatory or directory. It could not be disputed that, in general, the provisions in a Constitution should be regarded as mandatory where such construction is possible; Seen in this connection, the observation of Wynes in his "Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers in Australia," Fourth Edition, page 28. This observation, with which we are in complete agreement is based on Colley pp 154-155, Black's "Interpretation." pp. 21-22 Halsbury's Laws of England, 2nd Edn Vol. 31, pp-529 and following, and also a number of reported decisions. Seen also Sutherland's "Statutory Construction", 3rd Ed, Vol. 3, section 5807 which says that as a general proposition there is greater likelihood that constitutional provisions will be given mandatory effect, and that 'such a construction accords with the generally acknowledged import of constitutional fiat; that its character is such as to require absolute compliance in all cases without exception." It has been further explained that concepts of constitutional supremacy furnish reasonable grounds for "a presumption that the framers of a Constitution intended that just such efficacy be given to it."

Besides, the second proviso to the seventh paragraph of the Fourth Schedule has been cast in a negative or prohibitory form. It is a cardinal rule of construction that where statutory restrictions are couched in negative terms, they are almost invariably held to be mandatory: Sutherland, 3rd edition, Volume 3, p. 96, section 5814 which notes that "there is but one way to obey the command 'thou shall not,' and that is to refrain altogether from doing the forbidden act." This principle has been stated in Crawford's "Statutory Construction", page 516, section 261 in the following words:

"It is a rule of statutory construction that where a statute is framed in terms of command, and there is no indication from the nature of wording of the act or the surrounding circumstances that it is to receive a permissive interpretation, it will be construed as peremptory;" and again in section 263 at page 523 thereof it has been said: "Prohibitive or negative words can rarely, if ever, be directory, or, as it has been aptly stated, there is but one way to obey the command thou shall not', and that is to completely refrain from doing the forbidden Act. And this is so, even though the statute provides no penalty for disobedience. Accordingly, negative, prohibitory and exclusive words or terms are indicative of the legislative intent that the statute is to be mandatory,..."
22. In the case of Aminul Islam vs James Finlay and Company Limited, reported in 26 DLR (SC) 33 wherein it was held that:

"The moot question is whether the advice of the members of the Court is mandatory in making the award. Needless to say that difficulties are sometimes felt to determine whether a certain provision of statute is directory or mandatory. When the legislature itself expresses its opinion as to the consequence of non-compliance with a certain direction, no difficulty arises but in a case where the legislature does not indicate its mind as to the consequence of violation of such direction, the Court is to consider whether the direction is merely directory or mandatory and this is to be determined on the construction of the provision in question and the importance attached to the direction therein. As noticed earlier, rule 34 provides that the Chairman while giving an award shall consider the advice given to him the rule does not require the Chairman to follow the members to obtain their advice in any manner it is possible. It will be sufficient for the Chairman if he seeks the advice of the members. If any member intentionally refuses to give advice the Chairman has got no authority to impose any penalty upon him for his non-compliance with the rule. The question of consideration of the advice by the Chairman arises only when the advice is given. The rule is silent as regard the consequence of non-compliance. This clearly indicates that no special importance is attached to the direction as regards advice."
23. In the case of Jahir Uddin vs Rupali Bank Ltd. and others, reported in 12 BLC (AD) 115, it was held that:

"As it appears the High Court Division made the Rule absolute holding that admittedly, on and from 6-4-1984 the defendant bank, being denationalized, was converted into a private bank incorporated under the Companies Act, 1994 and, as such, the relationship between the plaintiff-petitioner and the defendant bank became that of master and servant from that date and therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to get a decree for declaration without consequential relief; in the instant case there is no prayer for mandatory injunction for consequential relief; even if there is a prayer for mandatory injunction but that too cannot be granted in view of legal bar under clause (e) of section 56 of the Specific Relief Act which provides that an order of mandatory injunction cannot be granted to prevent the breach of a contract the performance of which could not be specifically enforced; the breach of contract for personal service cannot be restrained by court ordering an employer to retain the employee in the service as it is the prerogative right of the employer to discharge his employee and the Court cannot compel a person against his will to employ any person and the employer bank is liable for damage and compensation in terms of Service Rules and Regulations; the suit is not maintainable as the plaintiff challenged the order of suspension and the final show cause notice but did not challenge the order of dismissal in which the impugned order of suspension and show cause merged and with the order of dismissal[sic] the orders of suspension and final show cause became infructuous and in the instant case this issue, which cuts the case at its root, has not been considered at all by the appellate Court below."
24. From the submission of the learned Counsel for the plaintiff-respondents, it is found that BCSIR was established under section 3(1) of the Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research Ordinance, 1978 as statutory public body. BCSIR has framed a Service Regulations in 1989 which is known as Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research Employees Service Regulations, 1989. Under regulation 1(2), it will be applied for its permanent employees. Regulation No. 55 of the above mentioned Regulation refers that "By Laws" regulating the service of the plaintiff-respondents was repealed by the said Regulation. It is found that the plaintiff-respondents joined as Research Officer on 27-12-1980 and as Research Zoologist on 13-11-1981. According to regulation 1(2) of the above said Regulations, the provisions of the Regulations are applicable for the plaintiff-respondents. Previously, the employees of the BCSIR were guided by "By Laws", which has been repealed by regulation No. 55 of the said Regulation, enacted in 1989. They are the employees of BCSIR. Regulation Nos. 37 to 48 of the Service Regulations, 1989 laid down the provisions regarding conduct and discipline of the employees of BCSIR but without following the same, the notices were published and charge-sheets were issued under section 3 of the Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979. Hence, the said notices or charge-sheets are not valid in the eye of law. It is further appeared that the plaintiff-respondents were dismissed under section 4(A) of the Government Servants (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 1979 from their respective service by following the procedure and in exercise of the powers with reference to the said Ordinance, which is applicable for the government servants. The above mentioned Regulation of BCSIR has not been included to the schedule of the Administrative Tribunal Act and, as such, there is no bar to file the suits in the civil court.

25. The contentions of the learned Advocate on behalf of the plaintiff-respondents in the case of Bangladesh Water Development Board, represented by its Chairman vs Syed Moazzem Hossain and others, reported in 1995 BLD (AD) 239 : 1 BLC (AD) 13, in which it was held that:

"A Declaratory suit need not be confined within the terms of section 42 of the Specific Relief Act which is meant for obtaining a specific relief. A declaration can be sought for various other matters as well."
26. It is found from close reading of the aforesaid decision reported in 1995 BLD (AD) 239 : 1 BLC (AD) 13 and 7 BLT(AD) 361 that the suit for simple declaration is maintainable in respect of service matter without any prayer for consequential relief. It has been held therein that a declaratory suit need not be confined in the terms of section 42 of the Specific Relief Act.

27. In the case of Jiban Bima Corporation, Dhaka vs Mustafa Hussain and another, reported in : 50 DLR 411, it was held that:

"A declaratory decree passed in a case without any prayer for consequential relief is an "annuity". Such decree is a gain and its implementation is dependent on as to whom the decree is passed against. In the instant case, the defendant being a statutory Corporation, there is no reason to believe that such corporation will not implement the decision of the court"
28. Section 2(AA) of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1980 defines statutory public authority in respect of which Administrative Tribunal Act will be applicable. Section 2(AA) of the Act reads as follows:

"statutory public authority" means an authority, corporation, or body specific in the schedule to this Act."
29. The main contentions of the learned Advocate for the plaintiff-respondents are that the respondents are not government servants, they are employees of a statutory body, BCSIR and, as such, the dismissal is illegal in the eye of law as contrary to the service regulations. Therefore, the High Court Division rightly allowed the appeals observing that the impugned letters of dismissal are void ab-initio because the plaintiff-respondents were not government servants, they are the permanent employees of BCSIR. They should have been notified by and proceedings should have been drawn according to the said Probidhimala. Admittedly, it is seen from section 1 of the Regulation titled.

30. Under the circumstances, it appears that the plaintiff-respondents are the permanent employees of BCSIR and in their case, the provisions of the above Regulations shall operate. The defendant-appellants without resorting the existing regulations of the BCSIR, they resorted to the Government Servants Ordinance, 1979.

31. The plaintiff-respondents claimed that before dismissal from their respective service, they were not served any show cause notices, though the defendant-appellants claimed that they served show cause notices and the notices were also duly published in the daily newspapers but the plaintiff-respondents refused any kind of service of notices. It appears from the record that the first show cause notice under section 3(B) of the Government Servants (Special Provisions), Ordinance, 1979 dated 28-11-2002 was served giving 5[five] days' time and the second show cause notice under section 5(2) of the Government Servants (Special Provisions), Ordinance, 1979 dated 21-1-2003 was served giving 3[three] days' time. As the plaintiff-respondents are the permanent employees of BCSIR, the procedure of serving notice shall be applied in accordance with the provisions of the Regulations and otherwise, the procedures are left to be followed illegally. Apart from this, Dw-1, in cross-examination, admitted that he had no knowledge whether the notices were served upon the plaintiff-respondents or not. It is revealed that the inquiry was held without having any knowledge of the plaintiff-respondents and the dismissal from service without affording opportunity of defence is illegal and arbitrary being violative of the principle of natural justice. It is also revealed that all the procedures of servicing notices, inquiry and dismissal had taken place under the Government Servants (Special Provisions), Ordinance, 1979 but it is obvious that the plaintiff-respondents are the employees of Bangladesh Council for Scientific and Industrial Research. It is our considered view that the defendant-appellants adopted wrong forum to dismiss the plaintiff-respondents from their services.

32. On consideration of the facts and circumstances of the case discussed above, we are of the view that the High Court Division is justified in allowing the appeals

Accordingly, both the appeals are dismissed without any order as to costs. However, for the period, the plaintiff-respondents were out of service shall be treated as leave without pay.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."

===End===

===75 DLR (AD) 288===
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF BANGLADESH (APPELLATE DIVISION)
Civil Appeal No. 413 of 2019

Decided On: 07.06.2023

Shuvash Chandra Dhar
... Vs. ...
Milon Chandra Banik and Ors.
Hon'ble Judges/Coram:
Md. Nuruzzaman, M. Enayetur Rahim and Md. Ashfaqul Islam, JJ.
Counsels:
For Appellant/Petitioner/Plaintiff: Probir Neogi, Senior Advocate instructed by Taufique Hossain, Advocate-on-Record

For Respondents/Defendant: Subrata Chowdhury, Senior Advocate and M. Qumrul Hoque Siddique, Advocate instructed by Sufia Khatun, Advocate-on-Record
Relevant Section:
CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 - Order XXIII Rule 1(3); CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 - Order VII Rule 11(d), CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908 - Section 115; TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882 - Section 52
Acts/Rules/Orders:
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Order VII Rule 11; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Order VII Rule 11(d); Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Order XXIII Rule 1; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Order XXIII Rule 1(3); Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 11; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 115; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 150; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) - Section 151; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (CrPC) - Section 145; Specific Relief Act, 1877 - Section 42; Transfer Of Property Act, 1882 - Section 52
Result:
Appeal Dismissed
JUDGMENT
Md. Ashfaqul Islam, J.

1. This civil appeal by leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 18-7-2017 passed by the High Court Division in Civil Revision No. 776 of 2016 making the Rule absolute and rejecting the plaint of Other Suit No. 450 of 2014 (hereinafter referred to as the present suit), after setting aside order No. 11 dated 13-3-2016 passed by the Joint District Judge of the 1st Court, Chattogram in the said Suit.

2. The present appellant Sree Suvash Chandra Dhar, as plaintiff on 1-12-2014 instituted Other Suit No. 450 of 2014 in the 1st Court- of Joint District Judge, Chattogram against the present respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and 11 others for (a) Determination of title, (b) Right to use pond under joint possession with other co-sharers, (c) Decree passed in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 does not bar in possession of the suit land by the plaintiff and (d) the defendants are not entitled to take any action against the plaintiff in Execution Case No. 1 of 2014, contending, inter-alia that, 0.2150 acre of land described in the schedule to the plaint, including part of pond and homestead, belonged to two brothers named Kashi Mohon and Ananta Mohan, which was recorded in their names in RS Khatian. The said two brothers were members of Hindu Joint Family. Kashi Mohon died leaving behind Porikkhit Banik (Proforma defendant No. 3 in the suit) as his heir. Later on Ananta Mohon died child less leaving the said Porikkhit Banik. By peaceful possession on the suit land for a very long time Porikhhit Banik acquired a better title by adverse possession as well; that, PS and BS Khatian were correctly prepared in his name. Porikkhit Banik sold the suit land to the plaintiff Suvas Chandra Dhar by registered Kobala deed No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997. Since purchase the plaintiff is in possession of the suit land.

3. On 27-6-2014 the defendants No. 1 and 2 disclosed that they got decree in a suit for specific performance of contract, which has been affirmed by higher Court and asked the plaintiff to vacate the suit land else they will evict him through execution case.

4. To prevent them the plaintiff on 3-7-2014 filed case No. 1234 of 2014 under section 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The plaintiff has come to know that the defendants No. 1 and 2 obtained decree in suit for specific performance of oral contract for sale of land and it transpires that the said decree was obtained by practicing fraud on Court. The plaintiff came to know about the fraudulent decree of the defendants 1 and 2 on 15-11-2014 and hence he filed the suit.

5. On 25-1-2015, the defendants No. 1 and 2 appeared by filing written statement and thereafter fired an application praying for rejection of the plaint of Other Suit No. 450 of 2014 contending, inter alia, that the suit property originally belonged to Mohendra Lal Dey who died leaving behind three sons namely, Kali Shankar Dey, Hari Shankar Dey and Narayan Chandra Dey as his heirs to inherit the property left behind by their father, Mohendra Lal Dey. Kali Shankar Dey and his two brothers on 7-12-1989 being in need of money, entered into an agreement for sale of the said property with Sudhir Chandra Banik (father of the defendants No. 1 and 2) but subsequently, when Kali Shankar Dey and his brothers having refused to execute the kabala, Sudhir Chandra Banik father of the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 instituted Other Suit No. 45 of 1990 against recorded tenants of the holding, which on successive transfer was lastly renumbered as Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 and was decreed. The said decree was reversed in other Appeal No. 521 of 1992 but the decree was restored in Civil Revision No. 4756 of 1995 and affirmed by the Appellate Division in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 81 of 2011. The decree has been put into execution in Other Execution Case No. 1 of 2014.

6. Porikkhit Banik predecessor in interest of the defendants No. 10 to 12 had instituted Other Suit No. 98 of 1992 for determination of title and confirmation of possession, which on transfer was re-numbered as Other Suit No. 91 of 1995 and was decreed. Sudhir Chandra Banik father of the defendants No. 1 and 2 preferred Other Appeal No. 153 of 1996, which was allowed and the decree was reversed. Porikkhit Banik preferred Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999 against the said appellate decree but anticipating defeat later on he withdrew the said Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999. The plaintiff of Other Suit No. 450 of 2014, Sree Suvash Chandra Dhar deposed as DW 2 in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 but now he has instituted the suit suppressing all the past events.

7. The plaintiff contested the said application by filing written objection. By order No. 11 dated 13-3-2016 the trial Court was pleased to reject the application for rejection of plaint finding inter alia that the question of res judicata argued as a ground for rejection of plaint is a mixed question of fact and law, which can be decided only at trial on evidence.

8. The defendant Nos. 1 and 2 preferred Civil Revision No. 776 of 2016 before the High Court Division impugning the order No. 11 dated 13-3-2016 rejecting the application for rejection of plaint. Upon hearing the parties on contest, by the judgment and order dated 18-7-2017, the rule was made absolute and the plaint was rejected holding that, the plaintiff claims the suit land by purchase from Porikkhit Banik by Registered Kobala deed No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997. Porikkhit had instituted Other Suit No. 98 of 1992 in the 5th Court of Senior Assistant Judge, Chattogram for declaration of title, confirmation of possession and perpetual injunction and got decree, but on appeal in Other Appeal No. 153 of 1996 the decree was reversed against which Porikkhit Banik filed Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999 in the High Court Division but later on he withdrew the Civil Revision on 11-5-2010 without any permission to sue afresh and as such the suit stands precluded under Order XXIII, rule 1(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure.

9. Impugning the judgment and order dated 18-7-2017 passed in Civil Revision No. 776 of 2016, rejecting the plaint of Other Suit No. 450 of 2014, the plaintiff filed Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 3902 of 2018 and obtained leave which giving rise to this appeal.

10. Mr. Probir Neogi, the learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellants submits that the High Court Division was wrong in making the Rule absolute relying on additional documents other than the plaint itself inasmuch as it is a settled principle that while disposing of an application under Order VII, rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the statements and averments made in the plaint only and nothing beyond the plaint are to be considered and relied upon.

11. He further submits that the decree in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 in favour of the predecessor of the defendant respondents No. 1 and 2 having been obtained against Sree Kali Shankar and his two brothers for specific performance of contract, and the present plaintiff-petitioner/his predecessor was neither a party to the said suit nor having not claimed the suit property through those judgment debtors, the said decree cannot operate as resjudicata against the present plaintiff-appellant.

12. He further submits that the decree obtained by the predecessor of defendant-respondent No. 1 and 2 in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 being a decree passed in a suit for specific performance of contract, and the present suit being one for declaration of title and other reliefs, the decree in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 cannot operate as resjudicata inasmuch as it is settled in a long line of decisions including CQ MH Md Ayub Ali vs Bangladesh, 47 DLR (AD) 71 that the decree in a suit for specific performance of contract only decides the controversy between the vendor and the vendee as to the genuineness of contract and its enforceability, and such decree is not one deciding title to the suit property.

13. He further submits that the High Court Division was wrong in rejecting the plaint inasmuch as it is settled in many cases including Abdur Rahman and others vs Kheru Malitha and others, 50 DLR (AD) 71: 5 BLT (AD) 217 that the withdrawal of suit by necessary implication blots out the effect of the judgment and decrees prior to withdrawal, and as such by withdrawal of Title Suit No. 91 of 1995 by Porikkhit, the vendor of the plaintiff-appellant, both the judgments and decree of the trial Court and appellate Court were blotted out, and the present suit by the plaintiff-appellant on new causes of action is not barred.

14. Next he submits that the High Court Division was wrong in making the Rule absolute and rejecting the plaint inasmuch as the application filed by the defendants for rejection of plaint was on the ground of the suit being barred by resjudicata, and it is an elementary principle of law settled by a long line of decisions including Mahbubul Hague vs Md A. Kader Munshi, 52 DLR (AD) 49 and Sreemoti Pushpa Rani Das vs AkM Habibur Rhaman and others 1993 BLD (AD) 217 that the question of resjudicata being a mixed question of law and fact can only be resolved by taking evidence, and as such the plaint cannot be rejected on the defendants' plea of resjudicata.

15. On the other hand Mr. Subrata Chowdhury, the learned Senior Advocate appearing with Mr. M Qumrul Hoque Siddique, the learned Advocate for the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 submits that admittedly the plaintiff purchased the suit land from Prokshit Banik, the sole heir of the tenants recorded in concerned RS Khatians by registered Kobala deed No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997, during pendency of Civil Revision No. 4756 of 1995 in the High Court Division and as such his Kobala was hit by Lis Pendens under section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.

16. He further submits that the Rule issued in Civil Revision No. 4756 of 1995 was made absolute by judgment dated 16-5-2010, which was affirmed in Civil Petition No. 81 of 2011 by judgment dated 12-6-2014 and Civil Review petition No. 97 of 2014 by judgment dated 6-4-2016 and thereby Sudhir Chandra Banik acquired title based on the decree for specific performance of contract for sale executed by the heirs of the tenants recorded in the RS Khatians and the present appellant Sree Suvash Chandra Dhar deposed as DW 2 in the said suit No. 41 of 1991.

17. He further submits that the appellant, knowing fully well that, father of Porikkhit i.e. Kashi Mohon and his brother Ananta Mohon had sold their land to Mohendra Lal Dey by registered Kobala deed dated 29-8-1934 and Porikkhit did not inherit any land, but still he created the collusive purchase deed dated 24-8-1997 with malafide intention to frustrate the decree passed in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992.

18. Next he submits that the present appeal, originating from the decree of Other Suit No. 450 of 2014, is merely a collusive and fraudulent attempt to frustrate the judgment and decree passed in Other Suit No. 41 of 1992, affirmed by this Division in Civil Review Petition No. 97 of 2014.

19. Mr. M. Qumrul Haque Siddique, the learned Advocate for the respondents in support of his contention has placed reliance in the decision of Abdul Jalil and others vs Islamic Bank Bangladesh Lid 53 DLR (AD) 12, Shahjahan Siraj vs Md Rafique Quoraishi and others 2 ALR (AD) 202 and so on.

20. We have heard the learned Advocates of both sides at length and perused the relevant laws and decisions together with the papers/documents contained in the paper book.

21. For better understanding let us first discuss the relevant provisions of laws on the issue.

22. Firstly, Order VII, rule 11 of the Code enjoins:

"Rule 11-Rejection of plaint-The plaint shall be rejected in the following cases:-
(a) where it does not disclose a cause of action;
(b) where the relief claimed is undervalued, and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to correct the valuation within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails to do so;
(c) where the relief claimed is properly valued, but the plaint is written upon paper insufficiently stamped, and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to supply the requisite stamp paper within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails to do so;
(d) where the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law;"
23. With regards to the question of withdrawal of a suit Order XXIII, rule 1 of the Code is reproduced below:

"1. Withdrawal of suit or abandonment of part of claim.
(1) At any time after the institution of a suit, the plaintiff may as against all or any of the defendants abandon his suit or abandon a part of his claim.
(2) Where the Court is satisfied,
(a) That a suit must fail by reason of some formal defect, or
(b) That there are sufficient grounds for allowing the plaintiff to institute a fresh suit for the subject-matter of a suit or part of a claim,
it may, on such terms as it thinks fit, grant the plaintiff permission to withdraw from such suit or such part of the claim with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the subject-matter of such suit or such part of the claim.
(3) Where the plaintiff withdraws from a suit or part of a claim, without the permission referred to in sub-rule (2), he shall be liable for such costs as the Court may award and shall be preclude from instituting any fresh suit in respect of such subject-matter or such part of the claim.
(4) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorise the Court to permit one of several plaintiffs to withdraw without the consent of the others."
24. Besides, section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act enjoins:

"52. During the pendency in any Court in Bangladesh, of any suit or proceeding which is not collusive and in which any right to immoveable property is directly and specifically in question, the property cannot be transferred or otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or proceeding so as to affect the rights of any other party thereto under any decree or order which may be made therein, except under the authority of the Court and on such terms as it may impose."
25. In the Case of Sumon Paul vs Binode Kumar Mali 5 LM (AD) 2018 139 his Lordship Mr. Muhammad Imman Ali, J observed:

"The High Court Division observed that it is true 'that a plaint of a suit should not be rejected under order 7 rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure only on point of res-judicata. But the facts of the present case are quite different. Apparently it shows that the predecessor of the plaintiffs-opposite parties lost their title up to Appellate Division and after settling dispute finally by the Appellate Division the present plaintiff-opposite parties purchased some lands in 2009 from the predecessor of the defendants of the former suit and they instituted present suit for declaration of title, confirmation of possession and for further declaration that the decree passed in previous Title Suit No. 235 of 1972 against the predecessor of the present plaintiffs are void and not binding upon them. The issue of present title suit was decided by the Court finally in previously instituted suit and that issue cannot be agitated in the subsequently suit.

The High Court Division concluded that the present plaintiffs-opposite parties having knowledge about the previous suit and having lost their title up to this Division, instituted the present suit which is nothing but a futile exercise.

Having considered the facts and circumstances discussed above, we are of the view that the High Court Division has properly considered the relevant law and facts involved in the case."
26. The same point has also been established in the case of Shahjahan Siraj vs Md Rafique Quoraishi and others reported in 2 ALR (AD) 202:

"What is important to note here is that the learned Additional District Judge rejected the plaints of both the suits as according to him those were barred under section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure. This is not the correct exposition of law. The plea of res judicata is to be decided after framing an issue to that effect. There is no scope for application of section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure for rejection of plaint.

Having gone through the plaints of both the suits, we are of the view that the plaints of both the suits were rightly rejected by the learned Additional District Judge but that should have been done by resorting to the provision of section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Therefore, the plaints of both the suits shall be deemed to have been rejected under section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure as the materials on record justify to do so. We are of the view that the ultimate decision made by learned Additional District Judge and the learned Single Judge are based on proper appreciation of materials on record."
27. In the decision of Abdul Jalil and others vs Islamic Bank Bangladesh Ltd. 53 DLR (AD) 12 it has been held:

"It is well settled now that a plaint may be rejected under Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure merely on a plain reading of the plaint but in exceptional circumstances the Court may invoke its inherent jurisdiction and can throw the plaint out in limini. It is also well settled that the plea of implied bar should be decided on evidence unless the fact disclosed in the plaint clearly indicate that the suit is not maintainable. In exceptional cases recourse may be taken even under section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It is also well settled that in an application for rejection of plaint on the ground of undisclosed cause of action the Court should not dissect the plaintiffs case part by part. "
28. In the land mark decision of Chowmuhani College vs Md Ismail Hossain 26 DLR 10 it has also been observed on the question of maintainability with reference to Order VII, rule 11 of the Code as under:

"to my mind the intention of the legislature in making the provision under Order 7, rule 11 of the Code is very clear and if the same be considered properly with reference to given facts in a case much time of the Court may be saved, parties may be relieved of unnecessary wastage of energy and harassment and they may be directed towards getting proper remedy without having the connected pleasure of prolonged litigation. In this case I have already held that the suit as framed is not maintainable and the said view of mine is supported by the decisions of our Supreme Court as cited above. So it is better that the parties in the instant suit should be relieved of unnecessary harassment."
29. The provision of Order VII, rule 11 of the code mainly enjoins that if on a mere reading of the plaint it is found that the suit is not maintainable the Court has to decide the said point outright. It is also held that Order VII, rule 11 is not exhaustive and the High Court Division in the instant case in exercise of his jurisdiction under section 150 read with 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure can reject the paint. Reliance can be placed in the decisions of Burmah Eastern Ltd., vs Burmah Eastern Employees Union and others 18 DLR 709 wherein it has been observed:

"Coming back to the fact of this case, I would like to say that, on a perusal of the plaint, there can be no doubt that the suit is incompetent. The plaint should be rejected out-right even if it is held that the ground for its rejection is not fully covered by express language of Order VII, rule 11, of the Code of Civil Procedure. What useful purpose would be served by allowing the defendant to file a written statement and, thereafter, to dismiss the suit after raising a contested Issue to the effect that the suit is incompetent, when the plaint itself discloses a suit which is not countenanced by law? If the suit is prohibited and its incompetency is evident from a mere reading of the plaint, it (plaint) should be rejected. Under clause (d) of rule 11 of Order VII, the Court is required to reject a plaint where the suit appears, from the statements in the plaint, to be barred by any law. In the present case although the suit may not be expressly barred by section 42 of the Specific Relief Act, the contention is that is la barred under law having regard to the requirement of the said section, namely, section 42 of the Specific Relief Act. If as a result of the provisions of law, the suit is barred, it would be barred under law, although, strictly speaking, it may not be specifically barred by law in express terms. The Court should, in such a case, reject the plaint under its inherent power."
30. In Burmah Eastern case as referred to above it was further held that "a still born baby should be buried at once" a proverbial legal proposition governing this field.

31. Now if we go back at the beginning of the litigations we would see that Sudhir Chandra Banik father of the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 of the present suit being Other Suit No. 450 of 2014 instituted Other Suit No. 45 of 1990 against recorded tenants of the holding, which on successive transfer was lastly renumbered as Other Suit No. 41 of 1992 and was decreed. The said decree was reversed in Other Appeal No. 521 of 1992 but the decree was restored in Civil Revision No. 4756 of 1995 and affirmed by the Appellate Division in Civil Petition for Leave to Appeal No. 81 of 2011 and Civil Review petition No. 97 of 2014. The decree has been put into execution in other Execution Case No. 1 of 2014.

32. Admittedly, the plaintiff-appellant claimed to have purchased the suit land from Porkkhit Banik, the predecessor in interest of the defendant Nos. 10 to 12 of the present suit by a sale deed being No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997. Porikkhit Banik prior to sale of the suit land to the plaintiff of the present suit instituted Other Suit No. 98 of 1992 for determination of title and confirmation of possession, which on transfer was re-numbered as Other Suit No. 91 of 1995 and was decreed. Sudhir Chandra Banik father of the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 preferred Other Appeal No. 153 of 1996, which was allowed and the decree was reversed. Porikkhit Banik preferred Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999 against the said appellate decree but anticipating defeat on 11-5-2010 he withdrew the said Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999. While allowing the withdrawal, the High Court Division set-aside the judgment and decree of the Appellate Court as well as the Trial Court. The contents of the application for withdrawal was to the effect that on perusal of the record the plaintiff appellant have understood that they should not have filed the suit now on proper understating of overall situation have decided not to proceed with the suit. The transferor of the present plaintiff did not seek any permission to release the suit due to any formal defect or any other reasons, rather it has been mentioned in clearest terms that they should not have filed the suit and decided not to proceed with the same.

33. Now it is to be considered in the absence of any leave from the Court whether a fresh suit can be instituted by the same person against transferee claiming title in the suit since no permission was taken for instituting a fresh suit.

34. It appears that Porikkhit Banik who filed the earlier suit transferred the suit land in favour of the present plaintiff who after purchase again filed the suit seeking declaration of title, permanent injunction and other identical reliefs being made in the earlier suit. It is clear that the vendor of the plaintiff filed suit No. 41 of 1992. Since vendor of the present plaintiff withdrew Revisional application as well as his suit, the present plaintiff is not entitled to file the instant suit.

35. The High Court Division clearly observed that the plaintiff claimed the suit land by purchase from Porikkhit Banik by Registered Kabala deed No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997. Porikkhit instituted Other suit No. 98 of 1992 in the 5th Court of Senior Assistant Judge, Chattogram for declaration of title, confirmation of possession and perpetual injunction and got decree, but on appeal on Other appeal No. 153 of 1996 the decree was reversed against which Porkshit Banik filed Civil Revision No. 4903 of 1999 in the High Court Division but later on he withdrew the civil Revision on 11-5-2010 without any permission to sue afresh and as such the suit stands precluded under Order XXIII, rule 1(3) of the Code of Civil Procedure.

36. Since, no permission is accorded for instituting fresh suit, the present suit filed by the transferee of the previous plaintiff is not maintainable.

37. It is fairly established here that the parties indulged in various litigations in different Courts in respect of the suit property and all the proceedings, the present respondents got verdict in his favour. The present appellant is not claiming title otherwise from Porikkhit Banik whose predecessor lost up to the Appellate Division and after loosing in the appeal, Porikkhit Banik himself has withdrawn the revisional application.

38. It is evident that the present appellant Sree Suvash Chandra Dhar as plaintiff filed other suit No. 450 of 2014 against the defendant No. 1 and 2 for declaration of three things as mentioned above who deposed as DW 2 in other Suit No. 41 of 1992 but knowing everything regarding the suit and its fate up to the Appellate Division he instituted the present suit suppressing all the past events.

39. In that suit defendant No. 1 and 2 filed an application under Order VII, rule 11(d) of the code of Civil Procedure for rejection of plaint. The learned Joint District Judge by order No. 11 dated 13-3-2016 rejected the application for rejection of plaint on the ground that resjudicata is a mixed question of facts and law, which can only be decided after adducing evidence at the time of pre-emptory hearing. Against which the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 preferred Civil Revision before the High Court Division and the High Court Division upon hearing the parties made the Rule absolute and rejected the plaint of tide suit No. 450 of 2014.

40. Notably, in the suit being No. 41 of 1992 the present appellant deposed as DW 2 that means the plaintiff appellant knew everything regarding the suit and its fate up to the Appellate Division.

41. As we have already mentioned that Porikkhit Banik from whom the plaintiff appellant purchased the suit land vide deed No. 1655 dated 24-8-1997 filed title suit No. 98 of 1992 which was decreed but on appeal it was reversed against which he filed Civil Revision before the High Court Division, but fearing the fate of the Civil Revision he withdrew the Civil Revision case, therefore, the bar of the provisions of Order XXIII, rule 1(3) would operate, wherein it has been stated that the plaintiff will be precluded from placing any fresh suit if permission is not taken. The purchase of the suit land by the appellant plaintiff from Porikkhit is absolutely a sham transaction being hit by the provision of Lis Pendens enjoins under section 52 of the transfer of property Act as mentioned above.

42. Therefore, if the provisions of Order XXIII, rule 1(3) of the Code read with section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act be considered in juxtaposition with facts and circumstances of the instant case, our view is that it squarely attracts Order VII, rule 11(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure and hence High Court Division did not commit any error in the decision by rejecting the plaint in revisional jurisdiction under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

43. Further, the case in hand is indeed of such an impact which as we have discussed above manifestly maintained that the rejection of plaint by the High Court Division was absolutely justified and hence cannot be gainsaid that there is a denial of justice in any manner.

44. The High Court Division has rightly rejected the plaint of Title Suit No. 450 of 2014 pending in the Court of Joint District Judge, 1st Court, Chattogram. The judgment and order passed by the High Court Division is elaborate, speaking and well composed. We are not inclined to interfere with the same.

Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed Without any order as to costs.


"Please note that while every effort has been made to provide accurate case references, there may be some unintentional errors. We encourage users to verify the information from official sources for complete accuracy."
===End===
